add vault-kv interface (#97)
canonical/charm-relation-interfaces: interfaces/vault_kv/v0/README.md

# `vault-kv`

## Usage

Some charms require a secure key value store. This relation interface describes the expected behavior of any charm claiming to interact with Vault Key Value stores.

## Direction

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Requirer -- mount_suffix, egress_subnet --> Provider
    Provider -- vault_url, mount, credentials --> Requirer
```

## Behavior

Both the Requirer and the Provider need to adhere to criteria to be considered compatible with the interface.

### Provider

Provider expectations

- Must provide the vault url

> - Must provide a key value mount, the mount name shall respect the following pattern: charm-<requirer app>-<user provided suffix>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Must provide a key value mount, the mount name shall respect the following pattern: `charm-<requirer app>-<user provided suffix>`
```

> - Is expected to create an approle restricted to the requiring unit's egress subnet.

Reviewer 2: The implication of this statement is that the AppRole must be updated with a remote units new /32 CIDR when a pod gets recreated and its IP changes - how do we coordinate this with the requiring side unit to ensure that the consuming service is not started before the AppRole has been updated?

Author: I don't see much options, either we accept the requiring unit having a wrong set of credentials while the providing app is creating the new ones, or we should send back the unit's egress subnet (either in the secret or in databag) so that the requiring unit can make sure the credentials is valid.

Author: @javacruft any input ?

Reviewer 2: I think as long as the consuming app understands there will be a period of time during which the old credentials will not be usable that's OK - we should make sure that's documented in the interface.

Charms can then deal with themselves.

> - Must provide a role-id and role-secret-id for each unit.
>   The role-id and role-secret-id shall be provided in the form of a Juju secret.
>   Usage of role-id and role-secret-id to access the KV backend shall be restricted to the unit's egress_subnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Must create an approle restricted to the requiring unit's egress subnet.
- Must create a Juju secret containing a role-id and role-secret-id for each unit
- Must provide the Juju secret ID in the relation data.
```

>   Usage of role-id and role-secret-id to access the KV backend shall be restricted to the unit's egress_subnet.

Reviewer: In k8s we must assume that pods can get rescheduled, is this behavior gonna hold still?

Author: It's possible to modify the egress_subnet on the VaultKvRequires instanciation (what's implemented in the draft PR). Which send a vault-kv-relationship changed when the pod gets rescheduled. I'm not sure this is best practice within ops framework, but it does work as expected.

Author: It is possible not to have to respect this behaviour, however, we must relax the security constraint on credentials. (which would remove all the part about unit_egress from the interface)

### Requirer

Requirer expectations

- Is expected to provide a mount suffix
- Is expected to provide an egress subnet for each unit requiring access to the vault key value store.
  The unit's egress_subnet shall be used to restrict access to the secret backend.

## Relation Data

[\[Pydantic Schema\]](./schema.py)

#### Example

```yaml
provider:
  app:
    vault_url: http://10.152.183.104:8200
    mount: charm-barbican-secrets
    credentials: |
      {
        "barbican-0": "secret://4f7cc474-a23d-49a2-8b6e-9835c1e08325/cjk5slcrl3uc767oebp0",

>         "barbican-1": "secret://4f7cc474-a23d-49a2-8b6e-9835c1e08325/cjk5slcrl3uc767oebpg"

Reviewer 2: Where are we with unit names in cross-model relation contexts? In the past the providing side of the relation see obfuscated unit names so interfaces that make use of the remote-unit-name to target a response to a specific requiring unit don't work correctly when used cross-model.

We've used a pattern with a nonce is presented from each requiring unit that the providing service uses to target specific information being return to a specific requiring unit.

Reviewer 3: >  In the past the providing side of the relation see obfuscated unit names so interfaces that make use of the remote-unit-name to target a response to a specific requiring unit don't work correctly when used cross-model.

That is indeed still the case.

Author: Indeed, the requirer units won't be able to get their credentials from the databag, since the provider app will see some obfuscated name for the unit, therefore, using a `nonce` provided by the unit is a good alternative.

However, I'm currently facing this [bug](https://bugs.launchpad.net/juju/+bug/2033486) when trying to share the secrets over CMR. I'll make the change to the interface when I'll know more about the bug

Author: Resolved, units will now have to provide a nonce. This nonce will be used to set the secret in the `credentials` field of the application databag.

# `vault-kv`

## Usage

Some charms require a secure key value store. This relation interface describes the expected behavior of any charm claiming to interact with Vault Key Value stores.

## Direction

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Requirer -- mount_suffix, egress_subnet --> Provider
    Provider -- vault_url, mount, credentials --> Requirer
```

## Behavior

Both the Requirer and the Provider need to adhere to criteria to be considered compatible with the interface.

### Provider

Provider expectations

- Must provide the vault url
- Must provide a key value mount, the mount name shall respect the following pattern: charm-<requirer app>-<user provided suffix>

> - Must provide a role_id and role_secret_id for each unit, with access protected by unit's egress_subnet

Reviewer: Can you extend a bit on how the egress subnet is used? That would be used when creating the approle policy right?

Author: The egress_subnet is used when creating an approle and when generating a secret id

### Requirer

Requirer expectations

- Must provide a mount suffix
- Must provide an egress subnet for each unit used to protect access to the secret backend

## Relation Data

[\[Pydantic Schema\]](./schema.py)

#### Example

```yaml
provider:
  app:
    vault_url: http://10.152.183.104:8200
    mount: charm-barbican-secrets

>     credentials: |

Author: Removed the UnitCredentialsSchema, since the secret will encompass both the role_id and the role_secret_id.

```yaml
credentials: |
     {
        "barbican-0": "secret://4f7cc474-a23d-49a2-8b6e-9835c1e08325/cjk5slcrl3uc767oebp0",
        "barbican-1": "secret://4f7cc474-a23d-49a2-8b6e-9835c1e08325/cjk5slcrl3uc767oebpg"
      }
```

# `vault-kv`

## Usage

Some charms require a secure key value store. This relation interface describes the expected behavior of any charm claiming to interact with Vault Key Value stores.

## Direction

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Requirer -- secret_backend, egress_subnet --> Provider
    Provider -- vault_url, kv_mountpoint, credentials --> Requirer
```

## Behavior

Both the Requirer and the Provider need to adhere to criteria to be considered compatible with the interface.

### Provider

Provider expectations

- Must provide the vault url
- Must provide a key value mountpoint
- Must provide a role_id and role_secret_id for each unit, with access protected by unit's egress_subnet

### Requirer

Requirer expectations

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer 4: I think we might want a way for the requirer to provide a part of the name, in the case where multiple secret backends are required. A unique ID with a different relation might work, but it would be more difficult for admins to identify at a glance.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: Yes, the goal is to be able to have multiple relations with a different secret backend.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: The goal application must use the kv_mountpoint to interact with the KV store.

It did not feel immediately clear that the secret backend sent by the requirer is gonna be the kv_mountpoint. Having the kv_mountpoint as part of the providers data removes any doubt

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer: What would be a better approach?

`<model>-<app>-<user specified suffix>`?

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer: I'm still somewhat confused here. Are we talking about the same thing? Is `kv_mountpoint` the same as `secret_backend`? In this spec there is references to both "concepts" but they always use the same value in the examples. 

If they are the same thing, let's use the same word. If they are different, let's explain what each is and not use the same value example.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: The vault charm is currently creating the following rules:
```hcl
# Allow management of policies starting with charm- prefix
path "sys/policy/charm-*" {
  capabilities = ["create", "read", "update", "delete"]
}

# Allow management of approle's with charm- prefix
path "auth/approle/role/charm-*" {
  capabilities = ["create", "read", "update", "delete", "list"]
}

# Allow charm- prefixes secrets backends to be mounted and managed
path "sys/mounts/charm-*" {
  capabilities = ["create", "read", "update", "delete", "sudo"]
}
```

This is where the `charm-` requirement comes from.

If we want to take the model name, should it be the model Vault is in, or the model the app is in ? (in case of a CMR) Seems like it would make more sense to use the model the requirer app is in following your example

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: Yes, in practice, they're the same concept, shall we keep `kv_mountpoint` then ? As a `requirer` config only.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer: The vault charm won't have any way to know about the requirer model, so that can't be the case. I would be fine with `<charm>-<requirer app>-<user specified suffix>`

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer: If we go with the prefix-suffix approach, the requirer could set the `mount_suffix` value and the requirer would set the `mount` value which would be the combination of the prefix (automatically generated) and the user provided suffix.

For example:
```
Requirer (`sunbeam-k8s`):
- `mount_suffix`: `my-user-key`

Provider (`vault-k8s`):
- `mount`: `charm-sunbeam-k8s-my-user-key`
```

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer: And I do prefer `mount` over `kv_mountpoint` or `secret_backend`. `mount` is what is used in the vault documentation.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: There's still the edge case when a requiring application is deployed twice in different models (same app name)

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer: Good point, should we also add a new suffix for a unique id? `<charm>-<requirer app>-<user suffix>-<uuid>`.

Overall this feels like way too long endpoints.

Is there an issue with those mounts not being human readable? If the mountpoints are simply generated by the vault charm and provided back to the unit ?

@ghislainbourgeois Do you have any opinion on this?

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: There's an issue, what's the required behavior if we break the relationship ? Should the KV backend be erased ? Or should a new integration of the same app connect back to the same KV ?

If there's a custom UUID generated on connection created/join you'll never be able to access back the data from the previous relation, and I'm not sure that's what we want.

About human readable, this only applies if we want users to easily use (and not copy paste) the vault CLI to access the mount, which is out of scope of a Juju relationship I think

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer: I think that if the relation is broken (meaning that there is a user intent behind it, not jut a pod going down) the KV backend should be disabled. If not, this could lead to security issues no? I guess we should align with what other charms do (ex. db's).

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: Looking at [postgresql-k8s-operator](https://github.com/canonical/postgresql-k8s-operator/blob/main/src/relations/postgresql_provider.py), this charm deletes the relation user, but keeps the database. When a new relation requests the same database, a new relation user is created and given rights on the database.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: What could be done to mimic the behavior of db charms is to disable the secret engine, which will revoke every secret leases. (lease should hold no effect over as kv backend do emit leases [docs](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/v1.10.x/concepts/lease).

I will confirm if re-enabling the secrets engine keeps stored secrets available

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: Moreover, from juju [docs](https://juju.is/docs/juju/manage-cross-model-integrations#heading--suspend-resume-or-remove-an-integration), using `juju suspend-relation` will run the departed/broken hooks, and if we disable the secrets engine, using `juju resume-relation` would not actually resume, since the secrets data would be removed.

It looks like we cannot differ `juju remove-relation` from `juju suspend-relation` from the charm

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer 4: I am not sure the user intent behind removing the relation can be equated to the user wanting to delete the data. I would be very wary of deleting data automatically and assuming user intent.

Additionally, some deployments might have data retention requirements that this would break.

If we want to provide cleanup, I would prefer to expose actions, or expose the UI or CLI for the admin.

Regarding the naming convention, I think the requirer app name in cross-model relations is anonymized, so `<charm>-<requirer app>-<user specified suffix>` would most likely work in all cases.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Author: I agree with your analysis, I don't believe we should delete the data.

The requirer app name still works with app name being `remote-<some uuid>`.

I'm currently facing this [bug](https://bugs.launchpad.net/juju/+bug/2033486) when trying to share the secrets over CMR.

> - Must provide a secret backend name, which must start with "charm-"

Reviewer 4: I think this is good enough, the provided suffix would help the admin identify the requirer if it is well chosen, and I do not think there is much more we can do in the interface to enforce that.
